Single-cell analysis in cancer genomics
Sally Jones, Assieh Saadatpour, Shujing Lai, Guoji Guo, and Guo-Cheng Yuan

Abstract

Genetic changes and environmental differences result in cellular
heterogeneity among cancer cells within the same tumor, thereby complicating
treatment outcomes. Recent advances in single-cell technologies have opened new
avenues to characterize the intra-tumor cellular heterogeneity, identify rare
cell types, measure mutation rates, and, ultimately, guide diagnosis and
treatment. In this paper, we review the recent single-cell technological and
computational advances at the genomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic levels,
and discuss their applications in cancer research.

Keywords: Single-cell analysis, Cellular heterogeneity, Cancer, Genomics,
Transcriptomics, Proteomics Go to: Cancer is a disease of multitudes Cells are
the basic units of life in which the blueprint of the genome is transcribed and
translated into biological functions. Cellular heterogeneity, which results
from mutation, differences in gene regulation, stochastic variation, or
environmental perturbations, is reflected at the genomic, transcriptomic, and
proteomic levels. Such heterogeneity is increasingly appreciated as a factor of
cancer treatment failure and disease recurrence, since a treatment that targets
one tumor cell population may not be effective against another [1]. Not only is
cancer itself a complex disease made up of a collection of individually
distinct pathologies, but also within each tumor, there is significant
heterogeneity among different cells. Current theories propose that cancer
development involves both a process of clonal evolution from mutated cells of
origin, and a differentiation hierarchy from cancer stem cells [2]. It is
increasingly clear that traditional bulk experiments, which only measure the
average profile of the population, have limitations in characterizing complex
diseases like cancer.

Single cells have been studied since the invention of the microscope, but it is
not until recently that genome-scale approaches have been applied to
single-cell biology [3–7] (Box 1). For example, microfluidic-based
single-cell sorting methods [8,9], high-throughput multiplexed quantitative PCR
(qPCR) [10–14] or sequencing approaches [15–23], mass cytometry-based
proteomic strategies [24–26], and data analysis methods [27–30]
provided an unprecedented opportunity to identify rare cell types, such as
cancer stem cells, and to investigate the dynamic processes of cell-fate
transitions.

One of the important application areas of single-cell analysis is in cancer
genomics (Figure 1). Recently, a number of studies have applied single-cell
analysis to characterize the cellular heterogeneity in different cancers
[13,23,31–33]. The comprehensive knowledge about cellular heterogeneity
will not only provide fundamental insights into development and other
biological processes, but also have important applications in therapy, as drug
resistance is often caused by heterogeneous response at the cellular level.

An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.  Object name is
nihms843418f1.jpg Figure 1 An overview of single-cell cancer genomics
Single-cell technologies are used to generate genomic, transcriptomic, and
proteomic data from cancer cells. These data are analyzed by computational
methods to identify clusters, lineages, and networks, which in turn generate
new biological hypotheses. Biological discoveries in turn guide development of
new technologies and computational approaches. The figure also shows a toy
example with a heterogeneous cancer sample containing three cell types (orange,
blue, and purple). An integrated single-cell analysis is used to identify the
cell-types, lineages, and network profiles.

In this paper, we review the recent technological and computational advances in
single-cell analysis, and discuss their applications in cancer genomics. We
conclude by offering a personal view of the potential challenges and future
prospects for this field.

One of the fundamental challenges in single-cell analysis is the amplification
of a small amount of initial nucleic acid material to reach the detection
threshold level. Recently, significant technical advances in whole-genome
amplification (WGA) have been achieved to overcome this challenge for
single-cell genome analysis. Based on the protocols used for WGA, there are
three main categories of single-cell techniques. GenomePlex PCR [32] uses
degenerative-oligonuceotide PCR to amplify DNA from single cells. The method
achieves low physical coverage, but the amplification is uniform across the
genome. It is therefore suitable for copy number profiling in single cancer
cells [32]. Another popular single-cell WGA method, Multiple Displacement
Amplification (MDA), uses Phi29 and random primers to amplify DNA in a linear
process through multiple displacement mechanisms [38,39]. This approach
generates long DNA products, and achieves high-coverage amplification, and
therefore is suitable for detection of point mutations at base-pair resolution.
The MDA protocol was first used in single-cell exome sequencing studies to
uncover the genetic landscape of cancer cells [38,39], and subsequently coupled
with a microfluidic system to amplify genomes from single human sperms [40].
Multiple annealing and looping-based amplification cycles (MALBAC) [41,42] is a
new WGA method that uses quasi-linear pre-amplification to reduce the bias
associated with nonlinear amplification. In MALBAC, single-stranded amplicons
generated through strand-displacement are used as templates to produce full
amplicons, then full amplicons form looped DNA to avoid exponential
amplification. This approach achieves high-coverage and uniform amplification,
and enables genome-wide detection of both single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) and copy number variations (CNVs) of a single cell. The method has been
applied to single SW480 cancer cells [41] as well as human oocytes [42].

Another frontier with significant progress is single-cell transcriptomic
analysis. Although there are more copies of mRNA than DNA in single cells, this
application faces its own difficulties in quantification of different RNA
species. In order to amplify the limited amount of mRNA in single cells,
several approaches have emerged. The Poly-A tailing method uses terminal
transferase to add anchoring sequences on the 3’ of synthesized cDNA, so
that each cDNA has two primer binding sites for PCR amplification. The method
was used in the first single-cell microarray study [43] and in the first
single-cell mRNA-seq study [17]. Sequence specific amplification (SSA) uses
multiplexed RT-PCR to amplify hundreds of specific targets in single cells.
This method has a simple one-step protocol, but is limited to analyzing only a
small number of genes [11,13]. The Smart-seq amplification method is a widely
used approach for full-length mRNA analysis of single cells [16,21,44]. The
method uses template-switching based protocol to anchor primer binding site on
the 3’ cDNA. The cDNA is then amplified by PCR and sequenced by Illumina
sequencers. Smart-seq has high coverage across transcripts, and enables
identification of SNPs as well as different transcript isoforms. One limitation
of Smart-seq is that the efficiency for template-switching is low and thus it
has difficulty in profiling lowly-expressed mRNAs. CEL-seq adds T7 promoters to
the cDNA and utilizes in vitro transcription (IVT) to amplify mRNA. The method
also shows robust efficiency and sensitivity for single-cell transcriptomic
profiling [15,45]. By coupling IVT with degenerative PCR based approach, the
recently published DR-seq method even achieves integrated genome and
transcriptome sequencing at the same time from the same cell [46].

For all the aforementioned single-cell transcriptomic methods, a common
drawback is the need to handle each single cell samples independently, which
limits the throughput of the analysis and also may inadvertently introduce
human error. Very recent breakthroughs solve these problems by high-throughput
molecular barcoding of single cells in microwells or microdroplets before
sequencing library generation [47–49]. The CytoSeq platform randomly
deposits single cells and transcript barcoding probes into an array of
picoliter wells before cell lysis and reverse transcription; any selection of
genes can be amplified and analyzed from the barcoded cDNAs [47]. The Drop-seq
and inDrop strategies, however, separate thousands of single cells into aqueous
droplets, associate a different barcode to each cell’s RNAs, and sequence
them all together [48,49]. These massively parallel barcoding strategies have
significantly increased the throughput of single-cell transcriptomic analysis.

The broad applications of single-cell genomic/transcriptomic analysis in the
biomedical field have also been supported by the rapid development of
microfluidic devices. Microfluidic devices help to automate the distribution,
processing, and analysis of biological materials, and have significantly
increased the measurement throughput. Microfluidic devices have been used as
the basis for various single-cell technologies, such as the single-cell capture
and amplification platforms [44,49], as well as high-throughput single-cell
qPCR analysis [13]. As single-cell analysis protocols are highly sensitive to
technical errors induced by manual processing, the accurate control provided by
the microfluidic devices is a significant advantage. Microfluidic devices also
improve the sensitivity of single-cell assays by confining the reaction volume
and increasing the local concentration.

In comparison to the progress made in assaying nucleic acids, single-cell
proteomic analysis is much more challenging because, unlike DNA or RNA
sequences, it is not possible to amplify protein sequences using current
technologies. Standard immunofluorescence methods have been routinely used to
analyze four markers at single-cell level. Now, highly multiplexed fluorescence
microscopic allows analysis of up to 60 proteins in tissue specimens [50].
Notably, the development of mass cytometry has dramatically increased the
multiplexity of cytometry-based analysis by labeling antibodies with isotopes
[24]. This innovation resolves the problem of spectral overlap that is common
in normal flow cytometry. It is now possible to measure more than 40 parameters
in a large number of single cells in a short period of time.

The methods discussed above require isolation of cells from their in situ
environment. Recently in situ methods have been developed to preserve spatial
information [51]. By computational integration of single-cell RNA-seq data with
in situ RNA patterns, one can accurately infer cellular localization within
complex patterned tissues [52–56]. Similarly, mass cytometry can be coupled
with immunohistochemical data to obtain highly multiplexed proteomic
information at subcellular resolution [57]. Another method, called multiplexed
ion beam imaging (MIBI), uses secondary ion mass spectrometry to image
antibodies tagged with isotopically pure elemental metal reporters [58]. Taken
together, these technologies have greatly facilitated the systematic analysis
of gene and protein expression variability at the single-cell resolution.

Go to: Computational methods for analyzing single-cell data With the
technological breakthroughs that have generated large amounts of
high-throughput single-cell data, the development of novel computational tools
has become an integral part of the analysis. Single-cell technologies present a
number of challenges that cannot be addressed by traditional computational
methods. First, each cell is typically measured only once and thus there are no
technical replicates in the strict sense. Second, the amount of starting
material is subject to strong stochastic variation. Still at an early stage, a
number of computational methods have been developed to address these issues
(Figure 2).

An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.  Object name is
nihms843418f2.jpg Figure 2 A typical flow chart for single-cell data analysis
Representative methods are mentioned. See the main text for detailed
description.

Preprocessing and quantification are the first steps of any large-scale data
analysis. The purpose of these steps is to convert raw data to quantitative
biological information. Significant effort is paid to estimation and removal of
systematic biases due to technical variability. A major issue in single-cell
analysis is that technical variation is always confounded with biological
variation. One simple approach to estimate technical variability compared the
pooled sample with bulk RNA-seq experiments [59]. More precise calibration can
be achieved by adding spike-in RNA to the library as control, followed by
building an error model based on the variation of the spike-in RNA [60,61].
Methods that account for single-cell specific noise, such as dropout events and
amplification biases, can also help to separate technical and biological
variability of individual genes [62]. Recently, scLVM (single-cell latent
variable model) [63] was developed to account for the confounding effects of
cell cycle on modulating differentiation and gene expression profiles. Another
approach to estimating reproducibility is to divide the RNA material from a
single cell into two equal fractions which are then analyzed independently
[20]. A recent review article [64] has provided a detailed survey of the
computational methods and, in particular, the normalization steps for
single-cell RNA-seq data from counts to expression values with or without
unique molecular identifiers. For single-cell qPCR data, normalization to an
endogenous control is not usually recommended due to biological variation and
transcriptional noise exhibited by single cells [65]. It was shown that
normalizing by the median Ct (threshold cycle) reduces variability in
single-cell qPCR data [65]. For mass cytometry data, technical variations can
be corrected with bead standards [66]. Normalization methods for CNV detection
based on channel, genome composition, and recurrent genome artifact corrections
have also been developed [67]. A review of the computational approaches to
correct for biases in the WGA procedure and accurately determine copy number
profiles has been outlined before [68].

The high-dimensionality of single-cell data provides a challenge for
visualization. Several dimensionality reduction approaches are available to map
the data points into a lower dimensional space while maintaining the
single-cell resolution. The conventional principal component analysis (PCA) has
been used to visualize single-cell data in different contexts [13,24,69].
Despite its success, this method relies on a linear assumption, and thus cannot
fully capture the nonlinear relationships inherent in many single-cell
datasets. This limitation can potentially be overcome by using a wide variety
of non-linear methods [27,30,70–73], although the performance of each
method is likely to be context dependent. The t-distributed stochastic neighbor
embedding (t-SNE) [72,73] preserves both the global layout and local structure
of the high-dimensional data by converting the Euclidean distances between each
pair of data points into heavy-tailed conditional probabilities. A distributed
implementation of the t-SNE algorithm, called viSNE [27], has been employed to
visualize single-cell mass cytometry data. Another approach based on the
Gaussian process latent variable model generates a smooth mapping from the
latent space to the original data space [71]. This method was extended to a
probabilistic PCA approach to account for censoring effect due to undetected
transcripts [70]. More recently, a dimensionality reduction approach based on
diffusion maps was adapted to identify and visualize the hematopoietic
developmental progression in mouse embryo [30]. In this approach, the cells are
related to each other through a gradual but stochastic, diffusion-like process.
All these methods can help interrogate the relationships among different cell
types in a lower dimensional space.

Unsupervised clustering is a widely used approach to group samples with similar
properties, which can be used for identifying previously unknown subpopulations
from single-cell data. Besides the classical clustering methods, a number of
approaches have recently been developed to analyze single-cell data. For
example, ACCENSE (automatic classification of cellular expression by nonlinear
stochastic embedding) [74] combines the t-SNE algorithm with density-based
partitioning without the need to pre-specify the number of target clusters.
Another recent effort in this direction is SNN-Cliq [75], which achieves
clustering of single-cell transcriptomic data by a graph theory-based
algorithm. For low-dimensional single-cell expression data emerging from qPCR
or FACS, the multiresolution correlation analysis (MCA) [76] can be useful in
identifying subpopulations based on local pairwise gene correlations. In an
effort to improve traditional manual gating in flow cytometry data, Citrus [77]
was developed, which identifies stratifying subpopulations of cells whose
abundance or behavior is correlated with a known endpoint of interest.

Having identified the cell subpopulations, one can identify the sets of genes
that best discriminate these subpopulations. In addition to the standard
differential expression tools for bulk experiments, new methods have been
developed to address the specific challenges in single-cell data analysis. For
example, SCDE (single-cell differential expression) uses a Bayesian approach
that accounts for the likelihood of dropout events in single-cell RNA-seq data
[62]. In another approach, MIMOSA (mixture models for single-cell assays)
employs a mixture model where information is shared across subjects through
exchangeable priors allowing to increase the power of detecting true
differences [78].

Although clustering approaches reveal the underlying group structure within the
data, they cannot provide information on the lineage relationships between
different developmental stages. One method along this direction is SCUBA
(single-cell clustering using bifurcation analysis) [28], which first infers
the cellular hierarchy using dynamic clustering and then models gene expression
dynamics using bifurcation theory. However, the application of SCUBA requires
temporal information, which is often difficult to obtain experimentally.
Computational methods have been developed to infer temporal information from
snapshot single-cell data, including using principal curve analysis [79], and
graph-model based algorithms such as Monocle [29] and Wanderlust [80]. The
inferred temporal information can then be used as input to identify bifurcation
events [28]. However, it is challenging to accurately infer temporal
information if the bifurcation structure is complex. A related approach is
SPADE (spanning-tree progression analysis of density-normalized events)
[24,81], which infers cell lineages without assigning temporal order. In this
case, additional biological knowledge is needed to interpret the resulting tree
structure. Similar approaches have been developed to infer clonal structure
using single-cell genomic data [82].

Network modeling can provide mechanistic insights into the coordination of gene
activities and help to understand the overall dynamics of the system. Efforts
are underway to apply network-modeling approaches to single-cell data. A simple
but popular approach is to construct networks based on co-expression. A variant
of this approach, called weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA)
[83,84], uses a soft threshold for modeling co-expression and also identifies
network modules (i.e., genes with coordinated activities). Co-expression
networks have been applied to single-cell analysis of the mammalian embryonic
development [19], hematopoiesis [14], neural stem cells [85], and leukemia
[33,86]. Although network analysis provided novel insights in these studies,
existing methods are applicable only if the sample size is sufficiently large
and therefore are not directly applicable for studying the networks associated
with rare cell types. In addition, correcting for latent confounding factors in
single-cell data can help to reduce false positive links in these networks
[63,87]. Co-expression networks can also be integrated with other types of
data, such as ChIP-seq data, to estimate the underlying gene regulatory network
[10]. Most network models are only a static representation of the system and do
not explicitly consider the underlying gene expression dynamics. Building
self-contained dynamic network models is challenging, although there are some
approaches, such as Boolean networks, that have been applied to study stem cell
differentiation processes [30,88].

Taken together, these data analysis methods have greatly enabled researchers to
systematically extract quantitative information from the single-cell data,
thereby playing an important role in applying single-cell technologies to
investigate biomedical problems.

Go to: Applications in cancer genomics Genome instability is a hallmark of
cancer. Spatial and temporal knowledge of the cancer genome will have a
significant impact on identifying cancer subtypes and developing
patient-specific treatment strategies. A notable application of single-cell
genome sequencing is in inferring tumor evolution paths. For example,
single-cell genome sequencing applied to two human breast cancer cases
suggested that tumors grow by punctuated clonal expansions with few persistent
intermediates [32]. Another study on a thrombocythemia patient uncovered the
likely monoclonal origin of this neoplasm [38]. Compared to the widely used
bulk sequencing methods, single-cell cancer genome analysis has the advantage
of characterizing intra-tumor cellular heterogeneity. For example, it has been
used to map the intra-tumoral genetic landscape in kidney cancer [39],
colorectal cancer [31], and leukemia [82]. Another intensely researched area is
the detection and sequencing of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) for either
understanding the metastatic process or early tumor detection. For example, a
study on reproducibility of CNV patterns in CTCs of lung cancer patients
suggested that CNVs at certain genomic loci are selected for the metastasis of
cancer [89]. A recent whole-exome sequencing of CTCs provided insights into the
mutational landscape of metastatic prostate cancer [90]. Recently, a
high-coverage, whole-genome/exome single-cell sequencing method (nuc-seq) was
developed and applied to breast cancer data wherein a large number of subclonal
and de novo mutations were found, suggesting that point mutations evolved
gradually over long periods of time [91]. In another study, by using
single-cell whole-exome sequencing in multiple myeloma, it was demonstrated
that the disease develops through a branching and parallel evolutionary
pattern, where two divergent clones independently acquired the same convergent
phenotype [92].

Single-cell transcriptomic advances in cancer research are also notable. For
example, by using single-cell qPCR analysis in human colon cancer, it was found
that multi-lineage differentiation represents a key source of in vivo
functional and phenotypic cancer cell heterogeneity [13]. The Smart-seq method
was used for profiling full length mRNA from single cells wherein by analyzing
CTCs from melanomas, distinct gene expression signatures as well as alternative
splicing events specific to the disease were identified [16]. A recent
single-cell qPCR analysis of a mouse model of acute myeloid leukemia identified
two subpopulations of leukemic cells, each characterized by distinct
co-expression networks [33]. Another study using single-cell RNA-seq analysis
in five primary glioblastomas (GBs) revealed that current GB classifiers are
variably expressed across single cells within a tumor, suggesting that
single-cell data can capture the true diversity of transcriptional subtypes
within a tumor that cannot be detected by population-level data alone [23].

Single-cell proteomic approaches from flow cytometry, to mass cytometry, and
multiplexed imaging, have also made great contributions to cancer research
[27,57,58,93,94]. For example, an application of the viSNE approach to mass
cytometry data on healthy and leukemic bone marrow samples showed that while
the maps of healthy samples overlap, the leukemic samples from different
patients form distinct populations from healthy bone marrow and from each other
[27]. Moreover, integration of mass cytometry with multiplexed imaging
techniques on breast cancer samples revealed substantial tumor microenvironment
heterogeneity [57,58].

All these examples demonstrate that single-cell technologies provide a powerful
approach to study the diversity and evolution of single cancer cells, which can
ultimately be applied to the clinic from early detection to identifying
therapeutic strategies for cancer patients.

Go to: Challenges and prospects Single-cell analysis is still a new field, and
there remain a number of significant challenges ahead (Box 2). A major goal for
technological development is to improve the throughput and accuracy of the
assays while reducing the cost. Promising results have been obtained by recent
development of several approaches such as massive barcoding, microwells, and
microdroplets [47–49]. Most technologies for single-cell analysis require
the destruction of cells, and thus the temporal information is lost during the
process. Along these lines, live-cell imaging technologies have generated
exciting results [95]. Similarly, isolating single cells from a tissue results
in loss of information about the spatial context, imposing a barrier for
investigating the role of microenvironmental factors in gene regulation and
cell-fate decisions. This issue is especially problematic for studying tumor
progression, which is known to depend heavily on its interaction with the
microenvironment. In this direction, several promising approaches have been
developed as discussed above [51–56]. Similarly, methods for single-cell
epigenomic profiling are still underdeveloped, although some promising strides
have been made [96–100]. Further development in this area would aid to
dissect the role of DNA methylation heterogeneity in cancer cells. Ideally,
this would involve the measurement of gene expression, chromatin states, and
DNA methylation states in a single cell, in order to elucidate the precise
regulatory mechanisms at the single-cell resolution. However, such an
integrated approach will require applying multiple measurement platforms on the
same molecule without alteration of its property, a task that seems to be
daunting if not impossible.

Computational method development is an integral component of every new
technology. However, single-cell analysis presents unique challenges that
require not only incremental changes but also revolutionary breakthroughs. Each
analysis pipeline begins with extracting the signal from raw data, which
requires the identification and correction of systematic technical noise in
order to properly calibrate different samples and batches. For single-cell
analysis, it remains challenging to distinguish technical variations from
biological variations [60–63]. Rare cell types, by definition, consist of a
small cell-population and may be detectable only in a relatively large cell
population. It is difficult to distinguish them from technical artifacts as
traditional clustering algorithms, which favor robustness, tend to identify
large subpopulations. Another challenge is to distinguish transient variations,
such as the ones caused by stochastic noise or regular cell-cycle variation,
from those that are essential for cell identity. Integration analysis of gene
expression data with states and transcription factor binding
information has been useful for interpreting the underlying gene
regulatory networks. However, as it remains difficult to map chromatin states
and transcription binding at single-cell resolution, it is important, but
challenging, to develop novel computational methods to integrate single-cell
gene expression data with population level datasets. 

Perhaps most importantly, great efforts are required to improve single-cell technologies and
computational methods in order to have direct implications in clinical
decision-making.


Nevertheless, single-cell analysis undoubtedly presents tremendous
opportunities. Taken together, applications of single-cell analysis will
greatly enhance the power of systematic characterization of cancer
heterogeneity and lead to mechanistic insights into cancer progression, which
ultimately will aid the development of novel therapeutic strategies, help us
better understand the mechanisms of drug resistance, and lead to improvement of
clinical outcomes.

^^ Consult Professor Yuan about this statement

Also, append images after selection with ImageJ. A picture is worth a thousand words.

